blog-entries/2010-02-08-first.md, before:

Title: How it Happened

At the end of 2009, we were contracted to do updates to a government web
site, including a ‘resource library’ specified with a spreadsheet with
one row for each link. I was expected to copy and paste from the
spreadsheet in to the [content-management system][1]. Worse, updates to
items were specified by updating the spreadsheet, leaving me to work out
which entries had changed, more or less the definition of an tedious and
error-prone activity. My attempts to automate this were made harder by
the hoops you have to jump through to appease the CMS. Wouldn’t it be
easier, I thought to myself, if we cut out the middleman and run the
site from the spreadsheet directly?

So one evening I knocked together a little [Django][] app that loaded a
spreadsheet’s worth of links in to memory and served them up as pages
with simple drill-down navigation automatically generated from keywords.
My first (and so far only) example is a [list of _Star Trek_ fan
films][2]. Though I originally did kind of a joke, I discovered (despite
being someone who normally shuns spreadsheets) that this is a fairly
convenient way to maintain a list of links.

  [resources]: /resources
  [Django]: http://www.djangoproject.com/
  [1]: http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Content_management_system
  [2]: /resources/fanfilms/
  [3]: http://www.apple.com/iwork/numbers/

Commit message:

Edited the front page blog entry to not say there is only one example.

blog-entries/2010-02-08-first.md, after:

Title: How it Happened

At the end of 2009, we were contracted to do updates to a government web
site, including a ‘resource library’ specified with a spreadsheet with
one row for each link. I was expected to copy and paste from the
spreadsheet in to the [content-management system][1]. Worse, updates to
items were specified by updating the spreadsheet, leaving me to work out
which entries had changed, more or less the definition of an tedious and
error-prone activity. My attempts to automate this were made harder by
the hoops you have to jump through to appease the CMS. Wouldn’t it be
easier, I thought to myself, if we cut out the middleman and run the
site from the spreadsheet directly?

So one evening I knocked together a little [Django][] app that loaded a
spreadsheet’s worth of links in to memory and served them up as pages
with simple drill-down navigation automatically generated from keywords.
My first example is a [list of _Star Trek_ fan
films][2]. Though I originally did kind of a joke, I discovered (despite
being someone who normally shuns spreadsheets) that this is a fairly
convenient way to maintain a list of links. So that is how the project
information section for this project page works.

  [resources]: /resources
  [Django]: http://www.djangoproject.com/
  [1]: http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Content_management_system
  [2]: /resources/fanfilms/
  [3]: http://www.apple.com/iwork/numbers/
